well howdy there I don't know people
it's Bo again so tonight we're going to
talk about Yemen what we are not going
to talk about is good guys and bad guys
because it doesn't matter we're going to
talk about the legal framework that
allows the us to transfer arms because
that's what's important and this is
important
completely separate from Trump's veto of
the resolution it really is but as that
veto gets discussed we need to know
about these frameworks and understand
whether or not we're breaking our own
laws anyway
I know there's gonna be somebody out
there going Bo you don't care about the
law you care about morality you always
talk about legality versus morality I do
and oddly enough as you're about to find
out us arms export laws are one of the
few places where the US government
attempted to establish a moral framework
within the laws it's really bizarre but
you'll find that out as we go along
before we get talking about that you
have to understand a little bit about
the political situation now in I want to
say 1990 I could be off by a year to
North and South Yemen became Yemen the
fighting started then okay it came to a
boiling point and reached US news and
became a topic in 2014 the government
the u.s. believes is legitimate is in
exile they're not in the country the
Saudis are actually running the war for
them that's who's getting the weapons
that matters
now what's going on on the ground in
Yemen it may be the worst humanitarian
crisis since World War I it's a toss-up
between that and Syria to be honest
we're talking about the indiscriminate
killing of civilians by Saudis as just a
daily occurrence
using hunger as a weapon it is estimated
that anywhere from 85,000 to 110,000
children under the age of five have died
of starvation this is not a normal war
this is not blue force red force good
guys and bad guys
okay that's important and it becomes
important because the way our laws are
structured okay so what mechanisms does
the u.s. have to transfer arms to a
foreign power the first of which is
obviously the arms Export Control Act
now it sets out certain criteria in
which the US can give a foreign power
arms one of which is to aid in
legitimate self-defense now even though
the government is in exile and we're
actually giving the weapons to the
Saudis to run the war the government in
exile acts asked for them now I know
some people are going to say it's not
the legitimate government it's not you
know none of that matters the US
government says it is in under the law
that's what matters so as far as that's
concerned there is a criteria that is
met for us to transfer arms however we
cannot transfer arms unless they are
being used for legitimate self-defense
legitimate self-defense means the
response is necessary and proportional
if it is not necessary and proportional
it is not legitimate self-defense okay
the 20s and 2017 the American Bar
Association said no it's not it's not
even close to legitimate self-defense
and that has a lot to do with the
indiscriminate killings now it should be
noted that there was an attempt to
change this in 2017 DoD sent advisors to
Saudi Arabia their entire purpose
basically was to teach this is the
Saudis how not to kill innocent people
and apparently they failed because
nothing has changed so the arms Export
Control Act is out that is not a
legitimate method a legal method to
transfer arms to a foreign power because
it is in violation of that portion the
next is the foreign assistance Act now
under that we cannot transfer to any
power any government any entity that is
consistently violating human rights if
you know nothing about Saudi Arabia know
this they're consistent violators of
human rights and you don't have to take
my word for it in 2016 the State
Department put out a report specifically
related to the foreign assistance act
about Saudi Arabia and said no we can't
use this that this is they are
consistent gross violators of human
rights so that one's gone then we have
presidential policy directive 27 which
basically says we can transfer we can't
transfer arms if they are going to
contribute to violations of
international law when it comes to
humanitarian issues or human rights
abuses starvation of a hundred thousand
kids that that pretty much kills that
dead in the water
now that one is causal and that's an
important difference under that
directive the arms themselves have to be
related to the act under the foreign
assistance act they don't we just can't
transfer to anybody that's a human
rights abuser
it's regardless of what the weapons are
used for and then cat pee which is the
conventional arms transfer policy that
it's got the same rolling as the
presidential policy we cannot transfer
to bad actors that's what it boils down
to those are the methods to transfer
arms under US law we can't under any of
them we're violating our own laws by
doing it now the president has said that
Congress is attempting to undermine his
authority as commander-in-chief I guess
and that's terrifying because civics 101
Congress has the authority to make war
supplying arms to one belligerent in a
conflict is historically seen as an act
of war its article 1 section 8 Clause 7
of the US Constitution gives the power
to make war to Congress not the
president he gets to be
commander-in-chief once the war is
declared
that's how that works so with Congress
saying we don't approve of this that's
and vetoing it that that's pretty
[Music]
unconstitutional so that that's where
we're at
legally speaking we can't transfer them
arms completely completely separate from
this resolution our own laws do not
allow the transfer of arms to the Saudis
especially for use in Yemen
so the question then becomes do we allow
a president to just run roughshod over
the laws do we allow him to dictate law
or are we a nation of laws I know
somebody's going to say well you know
Obama sent weapons to he did and it was
wrong then as well it was there was no
justification for it it was a slightly
different scenario it really was but not
different enough to matter legally
speaking there it was it was illegal
then and it's illegal now and it needs
to stop
anyway it's just a fault y'all have a
good night